In this lesson we're going to turn our attention back to Shopify liquid,and
we're going to talk about some of the limitations and
quirks within the templating language.
I'm going to go back to my new theme,
going to the code, and I'm going to open up the index template.
I'll go over here, click Index.
What I'm going to do for this lesson is I'm going to copy and
paste examples and then we're going to work through them.
What I've done is I've gone through the language and picked out
a bunch of limitation quirks and the ways around them.
I've got this initial paragraph here.
This is just a comment,
something for us to read,
and then I'm going to bring in the specific examples.
What I've written here is that while you can think of liquid as a programming language,
it's actually just a templating language.
Certain things that should be a given like being able to cycle through a global list of
articles or products are simply not possible in Shopify liquid.
Very frustrating when you're looking for that consistency and convention.
This is Shopify's templating language.
They take a lot of liberties and defy convention in multiple areas.
Also, the only data types you can create and liquid are primitives and arrays,
including arrays of arrays and primitives,
and what I mean by primitives are basically just strings and numbers.
Strings of course are just bits of text,
if you're not familiar with that term.
Another thing I should just mention up front,
I'm going to be using a lot of programming terminology.
I'm going to basically be taking a program is approach to liquid and
showing how we can do more of the advanced programming stuff in this templating language,
which is a highly limited language.
Here's some of the limitations.
As I just mentioned, you can't create an object in liquid.
You will see that in just a second,
you can loop through certain array-like objects.
It's very frustrating, but you can't actually loop
through all the articles in your Shopify site,
and you can't look through all the products in your Shopify site either.
The only way you can do that is through the all Collection,
which shows all products.
There's no way for us to actually look through products ourselves using liquid.
Very weird. But maybe they have a reason behind it.
You also can't create your own functions.
This is something you would do in any programming language,
but you can't create functions in liquid.
There is a workaround for this.
Say for instance, if you wanted to use a function in order to reuse code,
and you had some code that just took an input variable and did the same thing every time,
you can still achieve something like a function by using a snippet, and with snippets,
you can actually pass parameters in,
and that's one way you could mimic
certain functions that you would find in other programming languages.
The final thing that I have noted here is you
can create a boolean which is a true or false value.
But you can't assign the result of a comparison to a variable and then cool that boolean.
You'll see what I mean in just a second.
Let's talk about the first example,
which is string concatenation.
I'm going to copy and paste in a comment here for string concatenation and a heading,
so we can see it in our front end.
What I've done here is I've made two variables.
One is my first_ name and the other is my last_ name.
Now maybe I wanted to create a new variable with my full name.
In JavaScript or other programming languages,
you could do this all in one line.
If I open up my console,
clear it, create a firstName,
create a lastName,and then in order to create the fullName,
I could just use what's called string concatenation.
I can add strings to each other like this.
I would use the variable instead of the explicit Christopher.
FirstName plus a space in-between plus the lastName,
and now when I call for a fullName,
I've got the firstName plus a space plus the lastName.
I guess I can just use plus and minuses to add together strings.
In Shopify, it doesn't work like that.
Let's have a look at how we would do that.
The way we do that in Shopify is through the capture tag.
What capture does is it will capture basically everything inside the capture tags.
We can run a loop inside here.
We can do all sorts of things.
All I'm going to do is a very simple example.
I'm going to output the first_name,
then a space, then output last_name.
Now we've created a variable called fullName.
What I can just do is output that variable, full_Name,
and just so we know where it's coming up on the front end,
I'm going to put full_name in front of it as well.
Now, let's open up our preview in a new tab and we'll see I've got a heading,
String Concatenation, Full Name, Christopher Dodd.
Unfortunately, I've got my footer here as well,
which makes it look ugly.
Let me just remove that from
the footer briefly because this will be the last lesson we do on liquid.
If I go back to here,
we don't have that footer text anymore.
Now you can see the results of fullName has come out.
Now this is a very basic example,
but you can imagine what you could do here.
You could put all sorts of operations in here.
You can create a full loop and we'll actually see in a later example in
this video how we're putting a full loop inside a capture in order to make an array.
Let's look at the next example.
For the next example, I'm going to copy and paste the code directly in
because there's quite a bit here and I don't want to rewrite it.
Basically, this example is on sub-strings.
Sub-strings, like the name suggests,
a part of a string.
Say for instance, we wanted to grab the actual video ID part of a YouTube video URL.
In other programming languages like JavaScript,
we could use a function called substring,
and we could select where we want the substring to start and end,
and then we could assign that to a new variable.
Well, it's a bit different in Shopify liquid because there's
no substring function or method within Shopify liquid.
What we need to do is actually create an array from the string,
and then we're going to find the part that we're looking
for by taking one of the items of the array.
We've got this YouTube video URL stored in this variable,
and first of all, we're going to check if it contains youtube.com slash watch.
This is an optional step.
It's not necessarily relevant to the example,
but this is what you'd want to do.
You'd want to check if it actually does have this in the URL,
and then if it does,
what we're going to do is we're going to split the string around
the v equals and then we have access to what's on either side of it.
Now this is where it gets confusing because we have to do this in multiple steps,
and it makes it hard to label your variables correctly.
This example, we've got video_id here,
and then we're reassigning it to something completely different down here.
Here video_id doesn't necessarily make sense as a variable name.
But what we're doing here is just creating an array in order to access our video id.
If I can talk through it a little bit,
what we're doing is we're creating a variable where we're taking
the URL and we're going to split it by v equals.
If we remember what split does,
it creates an array.
Now we've got this video_id array and it's got two items.
It's got everything before the v equals,
and after the v equals.
We're going put in an extra check here.
Again, it is not compulsory,
but if you have a second argument in your YouTube URL,
you're going to want to check for that.
If that's the case,
we're going to split again because we don't want the part after the end.
Say for instance, I went over here and maybe I put in a time,
I think the code is t in YouTube, t or s,
I think let me just save that because we're
filtering here and taking out the part after the end,
we should be fine anyway.
Now what I'm doing is taking that array up here,
finding the second value in that array,
which will be the part after v equals,
and then I'm going to split it again by this end.
I'm going to split it again,
and on the same line,
I'm going to take the first item in the resulting array.
I've got this string which we're going to turn into an array.
Then we're splitting it up with this as the first item of the array,
and then this as the second item of the array.
Then what we have to do is do the exact same thing on this section.
This is going to be the first item of the array,and this on the other side of the end,
which is this split character,
is what's going to be the second item in the array.
Then we just call first,
to get the first item in the array,
we don't care about the second.
What happens is we get our final video_id and
then we can insert that directly into an Embed link.
Let's check if that works.
We're going to go over here and refresh the page.
Now we can see that we have my video link here.
What we just did was we converted this YouTube URL into a YouTube embed URL,
which takes the same id from here.
Now I know this is a lot of lines, and as I said,
the variable names are confusing because we have to take it multiple steps.
You might want to name this something else.
Maybe you want to call this a video URL_parts and then reference it as video_ parts here.
Let's just do that for an example to make it easier.
We've got video parts and then call it video_parts here.
Save that it should still work,
and turns out it does.
That's just a tip if you want to make it more
readable for yourself and it does sound confusing,
you can label the variable something else,
but a lot of times you're going to see it like this way.
You just recycled a variable name.
The next example is probably the most complicated
of the examples I'm going to talk about in this advanced liquid lesson,
and that's creating arrays of objects.
I put objects in double quotation marks here because as we mentioned before,
we can't create objects and liquid and we can't
create our own arrays of objects as we saw before.
The only way we can create an array is by taking
a string and splitting it based on some delimiting value.
Then we have an item for each of the parts
of the string that are between those splitting values.
So that means that we can't actually create arrays of objects.
So as I wrote here, Shopify liquid does not allow for making
objects and neither can you create arrays of objects.
You can, however, make arrays of strings and numbers,
as well as arrays of arrays using Capture and split.
So how do I want to explain this,
for those of you who maybe don't fully get what I'm saying here
is show you an example in JavaScript first.
So in JavaScript, I could create two objects.
Let's create two person objects I'm going to have person1,
which is going to have a first name and last name of Christopher Dodd.
Then I came up with a random person name for person2,
which is going to be Michael Jordan.
I don't know why I chose Michael Jordan.
His name just came to me not making any comparisons there at all.
So then what I could do is create a person array.
I could store both of those objects in this array.
The way you create an array in JavaScript,
open up a square bracket,
put in your first object,
putting your second object or value.
Then now if I output person array,
you can see I've got this list of objects.
What this allows me to do,
like we've done with looping through products in a collection,
is I can loop through this array and grab the first name of every person, for instance.
Now unfortunately, we can't do that ourselves in Shopify liquid.
The equivalent of what I just did if it existed in Shopify liquid,
would be to create an array called,
let's just call it collections I don't think we're using that already.
I could just can't use square brackets in liquid,
but it'd be nice if you could create something like this collection,
collection2 and then we end it like that.
So now we've created this array of collections.
So if I save that,
we're going to get a liquid error up here.
Liquid syntax error expected end of string but found comma in collection, collection2.
So it's telling us we can't do it and indeed,
if we try and reference the first item in this.
So if I tried to do collections,
take the first item in the array and say title,
if I output that nothing's going to come up on the screen.
We've just got the heading for this section.
But we don't actually have the title
of the first collection because we can't actually do this.
So that can be frustrating at times in liquid,
there are times where we might want to create our own collections, I guess.
But the obvious way around it is to actually create
your collection in Shopify and then you can loop through it like normal.
In Shopify, you can't create objects in liquid,
but you can of course,
create collections in your store and that
is an object with an array of products in there.
There are some workarounds to this.
I'm just going to copy and paste in some more code to go through if you guys now.
This first example is a bit tricky,
but once you get your head around it, it should make sense.
What we're going to do is we're going to use
that capture tag before to create a list of products.
How we're going to limit each of these different attributes?
Is we're going to use a pipe symbol,
and then at the end of that product we're going to put in a double colon.
Let's walk through what's going on here.
So we are capturing the result of this into a variable.
So what we're going to do is loop through a array of products in
a collection and then we're going to grab the pots that we want to have access to.
So we've got product title.
Then we put in a character for us to split that with the next value,
which is product URL,
split again and split again using these values that we've pulled off the product object.
Then this one puts in a delimiter to end the product as long as it's not the last one.
Because we don't want to confuse our split filter
here to think that there is another item after that.
So if it's the last one, that's it.
No more splitting required.
At the end of this, what we're going to have is
a string with all of this information split up by pipes,
and at the end of the product, these two columns.
I think it's going to make the most sense if I just outputted on the page.
So if I just output products,
list, save, and we'll look at the results in our preview.
So if we look down, we've got the title,
then we've got a pipe to separate it from the URL of
that product and we've got another pipe
to separate it from the description of that product.
Then we've got another pipe to separate it from the image URL,
and then we can see here we've got the two colons to separate it from the next product,
and then we've got the same thing again.
So this is not too useful because this is all just one string,
but because we've got those characters in there to indicate when to split,
we can now use the split filter to actually make this into an array.
So now I'm going to create a product's array from
that products list and splitting it by this delimiter.
So now I'm going to have just this part.
I'm going to have an array with items that just have this part.
But again, I want to split that further once I'm
inside it and I want to split by this pipe.
So now I'm going to loop through all of
the products and the products array and then create
another array calledproduct_vals and we're going to split by this now.
Now, I can reference the values inside this array by their position.
So unfortunately, course we're not creating an object here.
I can't actually say,
give me the product title.
So it's not very readable code but again, it's a workaround.
So I can actually use this to find
the first value and if I know the first value is always going to be product title,
then this will give me the product title.
This is going to give me the third value.
So if I look at this one and then I go over here to number three,
it's going to give me the product description.
So if I save that,
I think the code was running before anyway,
we refresh the page.
You'll see that we have the title and
the description of all of these products within that array.
So this isn't a very practical example,
but it's showing you a way that you can actually do
things that you would use an object for,
but do it in Shopify liquid where you can't create objects.
I'm going to do one more example and then we're going to move on.
This example might actually make more sense for you.
So this example I took from raisedbyturtles.org,
definitely check them out and give them a shout out for me.
So what we're doing here is we're creating multiple arrays.
The first array is going to describe what this object is and then
the second array and arrays after that will have values,
attributes basically within that array.
So if you can see what I'm doing here or what
the author at raised by turtles.org has done.
We've created this items array and we splitting by this hash symbol.
So we're going to have in our items array two items, item1 and item2.
Then in that colors array,
we're going to have blue and green.
So the way we can link these together is by their position in the array.
So as long as we write the first item in our colors
array to match up with the first item in our items array,
then we can reference them by the same index and that's what we're doing here.
So what we're doing here,
and ignore these lines here.
That's just to reduce white space it does the exact same thing as that.
But basically what we're doing here is we're
running through every item in the items array,
and if it's the first item,
we're going to get the color attribute by referencing the index of the loop.
So let's just remove this conditional and what we'll get
is we'll get an array of items outputting the color that belongs to it.
So if I hit save,
refresh the page, and I scroll down,
we'll get blue and green.
We can even come here and if we wanted to add the item name associated with that color,
what we could do is because we're already inside the item and the item array,
we can just output item and then I'm going to put a break tag to break these up.
We should see item one blue item to green.
Refresh the page and you'll see item one blue item to green.
Now, I feel like I need to say something here and that's if you don't
fully understand the practical application of this right now, don't worry.
This is advanced liquid stuff.
That's why I called it the Advanced liquid lesson.
Essentially what I'm trying to do here is once you get
deeper into your Shopify liquid programming journey,
and start to master the language more.
You're going to need to know how to do things at
the fringes and so that's what this lesson is about.
Using the references that I've shown you already,
using your arm practice with Shopify theme programming,
and then coming to a point where there's
certain stuff I want to do in the programming language.
What am I limitations and how do I get around that?
So if you're not at that stage yet,
don't worry too much,
I just thought I'd mention that right now
because this is an area where you might be thinking,
okay, Chris, why do I need to do this stuff?
Well, if you don't need to do it yet, don't worry.
But this is stuff once you get real deep into
Shopify liquid that you're going to want to be aware of.
Okay, as program is,
we'd like to think that there's a consistent,
conventional way of doing things.
But the frustrating thing with Shopify liquid
is that it's a templating language developed by Shopify,
and there's a lot of quirks and differences in there.
It defies convention in a lot of ways.
So this lesson is like the antidote to that.
So again, this is some advanced stuff. Don't worry too much.
If this is not something you can use straight away.
But maybe it's something to come back to at a later date.
That being said, let's move on to our final examples.
The next example is about storing Boolean values.
So as I mentioned up above,
let me split this up.
Call this creating Booleans.
As I mentioned up above here.
We can create a Boolean,
but only by assigning it explicitly true or false.
We can actually assign the result of a comparison to a variable.
What I mean by that is, again,
I'm going to show you an example in JavaScript.